README.md, before:

# Lab Material for Computer Architecture

This repository provides lab material for the 2017
[Computer Architecture and Engineering course (02155)](http://www2.imm.dtu.dk/courses/02155/) at DTU.
Although this lab is customized for the DTU course, it can also serve as
introduction lab for computer architecture in general and the RISC-V
instruction set specifically.

The lab is based on COD: [Computer Organization and Design RISC-V Edition](https://www.amazon.com/Computer-Organization-Design-RISC-V-Architecture/dp/0128122757):
The Hardware Software Interface, 1st Edition,
by David A. Patterson (Author), John L. Hennessy (Author).

To use this material you can: (1) just browse it online on GitHub,
(2) clone the repo to have all material offline (using it also
for your solutions),
or (3) fork the repo (and clone locally), to be able to contribute back with changes.

**Contributions:** We are happily accepting contributions in the form of
pull requests. Even the fix of a small typo is appreciated.

## Lab Overview

The following list gives an overview of all lab sessions and assignments.
For lab sessions where no link is given, we will provide the material in CampusNet.

 * week 1: Number representation and performance
 * week 2: [Lab 2](lab2)
 * week 3: [Lab 3](lab3)
 * week 4: paper and pencil
 * week 5: assignment
 * week 6: [Lab 6](lab6)
 * week 7: [Lab 7](lab7)

## Resources

### RISC-V Simple Simulator

For the first labs we will use the web based RISC-V simulator [Venus](https://kvakil.github.io/venus/).
Venus executes in your browser and there is no need to install any tools
on your laptop. You can also save that web page to have a local copy of
the simulator to work when offline.

### RISC-V Advanced Simulator

For later labs we will use the RISCV pipeline simulator Ripes.
Download it from [here](https://github.com/mortbopet/Ripes/releases).
No installation is required, however, enable the file's execute bit to make it executable.

### RISC-V Tools

For later lab exercises and your final project we need the full RISC-V toolchain, including a port of gcc.

#### Ubuntu (Linux)

Install the tools by running the following command in the terminal:
```bash
sudo apt install gcc-riscv64-linux-gnu
```

#### Windows

The same commands that are used for Ubuntu can be used under Windows
by using the Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL).
Activate it and install Ubuntu by following the guide
[here](https://ubuntu.com/tutorials/ubuntu-on-windows#1-overview).

Now follow the instructions for Ubuntu above. 

#### macOS

Under macOS you need a packet manager.
[Homebrew](https://brew.sh/) is one of the popular ones.
After installing homebrew, install the RISC-V tool bew package from
[here](https://github.com/riscv-software-src/homebrew-riscv).

#### Linker file

We need a linker file when compiling bare metal programs, particularly
for the final project. Create it in the $HOME directory by running the following command:
```
echo -e 'SECTIONS {\n.text :{*(*)}\n}' > $HOME/linker.ld
```

Test the installation by opening a terminal and starting the compiler with:
```
riscv64-linux-gnu-gcc
```

You should get an error, similar to following
```
riscv64-linux-gnu-gcc: fatal error: no input files
compilation terminated.
```
which is good as you know the the compiler is installed.
You are now prepared for all RISC-V based lab work and projects.

## Links

 * [The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual](https://riscv.org/specifications/)
 * [Venus RV32I simulator](https://kvakil.github.io/venus/)
 * [RISC-V Green Card](https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/teaching/1617/ECAD+Arch/files/docs/RISCVGreenCardv8-20151013.pdf)
 * [RISC-V Tools (GNU Toolchain, ISA Simulator, Tests)](https://github.com/riscv/riscv-tools)
 * [Rocket Chip Generator (including the RISC- tools)](https://github.com/freechipsproject/rocket-chip)
 * [Wildcat RV32I simulator](https://github.com/schoeberl/wildcat)
 * [SPIM system calls](https://www.doc.ic.ac.uk/lab/secondyear/spim/node8.html)
 * [Bare metal program on spike](https://github.com/schoeberl/cae-examples)

### Other University Courses using RISC-V

 * [UC Berkeley: CS61C: Great Ideas in Computer Architecture (Machine Structures)](http://inst.eecs.berkeley.edu/~cs61c/fa17/)
 * [MIT: 6.175: Constructive Computer Architecture](http://csg.csail.mit.edu/6.175/index.html)
 * [Cornell: ECE 4750: Computer Architecture](http://www.csl.cornell.edu/courses/ece4750/2016f/)

### Some More (Unchecked) Links

 * [Eclipse plugin](https://gnu-mcu-eclipse.github.io/plugins/features/)
 * <https://stackoverflow.com/questions/31390127/how-can-i-compile-c-code-to-get-a-bare-metal-skeleton-of-a-minimal-risc-v-assemb>
 * [Assembler appendix from H&P](http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~larus/HP_AppA.pdf)
 * [MARS docu](http://courses.missouristate.edu/KenVollmar/mars/CCSC-CP%20material/MARS%20Tutorial.doc)
 * [CS61C summer lab 3](http://www-inst.eecs.berkeley.edu/~cs61c/su17/labs/03/)

Commit message:

Add compiler name for macOS

README.md, after:

# Lab Material for Computer Architecture

This repository provides lab material for the 2017
[Computer Architecture and Engineering course (02155)](http://www2.imm.dtu.dk/courses/02155/) at DTU.
Although this lab is customized for the DTU course, it can also serve as
introduction lab for computer architecture in general and the RISC-V
instruction set specifically.

The lab is based on COD: [Computer Organization and Design RISC-V Edition](https://www.amazon.com/Computer-Organization-Design-RISC-V-Architecture/dp/0128122757):
The Hardware Software Interface, 1st Edition,
by David A. Patterson (Author), John L. Hennessy (Author).

To use this material you can: (1) just browse it online on GitHub,
(2) clone the repo to have all material offline (using it also
for your solutions),
or (3) fork the repo (and clone locally), to be able to contribute back with changes.

**Contributions:** We are happily accepting contributions in the form of
pull requests. Even the fix of a small typo is appreciated.

## Lab Overview

The following list gives an overview of all lab sessions and assignments.
For lab sessions where no link is given, we will provide the material in CampusNet.

 * week 1: Number representation and performance
 * week 2: [Lab 2](lab2)
 * week 3: [Lab 3](lab3)
 * week 4: paper and pencil
 * week 5: assignment
 * week 6: [Lab 6](lab6)
 * week 7: [Lab 7](lab7)

## Resources

### RISC-V Simple Simulator

For the first labs we will use the web based RISC-V simulator [Venus](https://kvakil.github.io/venus/).
Venus executes in your browser and there is no need to install any tools
on your laptop. You can also save that web page to have a local copy of
the simulator to work when offline.

### RISC-V Advanced Simulator

For later labs we will use the RISCV pipeline simulator Ripes.
Download it from [here](https://github.com/mortbopet/Ripes/releases).
No installation is required, however, enable the file's execute bit to make it executable.

### RISC-V Tools

For later lab exercises and your final project we need the full RISC-V toolchain, including a port of gcc.

#### Ubuntu (Linux)

Install the tools by running the following command in the terminal:
```bash
sudo apt install gcc-riscv64-linux-gnu
```

#### Windows

The same commands that are used for Ubuntu can be used under Windows
by using the Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL).
Activate it and install Ubuntu by following the guide
[here](https://ubuntu.com/tutorials/ubuntu-on-windows#1-overview).

Now follow the instructions for Ubuntu above. 

#### macOS

Under macOS you need a packet manager.
[Homebrew](https://brew.sh/) is one of the popular ones.
After installing homebrew, install the RISC-V tool bew package from
[here](https://github.com/riscv-software-src/homebrew-riscv).

Note that the name of the compiler and tools on macOS will be slightly different:
```
riscv64-unknown-elf-gcc
```

#### Linker file

We need a linker file when compiling bare metal programs, particularly
for the final project. Create it in the $HOME directory by running the following command:
```
echo -e 'SECTIONS {\n.text :{*(*)}\n}' > $HOME/linker.ld
```

Test the installation by opening a terminal and starting the compiler with:
```
riscv64-linux-gnu-gcc
```

You should get an error, similar to following
```
riscv64-linux-gnu-gcc: fatal error: no input files
compilation terminated.
```
which is good as you know the the compiler is installed.
You are now prepared for all RISC-V based lab work and projects.

## Links

 * [The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual](https://riscv.org/specifications/)
 * [Venus RV32I simulator](https://kvakil.github.io/venus/)
 * [RISC-V Green Card](https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/teaching/1617/ECAD+Arch/files/docs/RISCVGreenCardv8-20151013.pdf)
 * [RISC-V Tools (GNU Toolchain, ISA Simulator, Tests)](https://github.com/riscv/riscv-tools)
 * [Rocket Chip Generator (including the RISC- tools)](https://github.com/freechipsproject/rocket-chip)
 * [Wildcat RV32I simulator](https://github.com/schoeberl/wildcat)
 * [SPIM system calls](https://www.doc.ic.ac.uk/lab/secondyear/spim/node8.html)
 * [Bare metal program on spike](https://github.com/schoeberl/cae-examples)

### Other University Courses using RISC-V

 * [UC Berkeley: CS61C: Great Ideas in Computer Architecture (Machine Structures)](http://inst.eecs.berkeley.edu/~cs61c/fa17/)
 * [MIT: 6.175: Constructive Computer Architecture](http://csg.csail.mit.edu/6.175/index.html)
 * [Cornell: ECE 4750: Computer Architecture](http://www.csl.cornell.edu/courses/ece4750/2016f/)

### Some More (Unchecked) Links

 * [Eclipse plugin](https://gnu-mcu-eclipse.github.io/plugins/features/)
 * <https://stackoverflow.com/questions/31390127/how-can-i-compile-c-code-to-get-a-bare-metal-skeleton-of-a-minimal-risc-v-assemb>
 * [Assembler appendix from H&P](http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~larus/HP_AppA.pdf)
 * [MARS docu](http://courses.missouristate.edu/KenVollmar/mars/CCSC-CP%20material/MARS%20Tutorial.doc)
 * [CS61C summer lab 3](http://www-inst.eecs.berkeley.edu/~cs61c/su17/labs/03/)
